COMMENTA few weeks ago, French President Fran ois Hollande announced the Calais Jungle refugee camp would be dismantled, leaving thousands of destitute refugees, including unaccompanied minors, in northern France with nowhere to go. Although many have since been able to submit an asylum claim, it still remains that for months on end these refugees from countries such as Syria, Afghanistan and Eritrea relied on the help of small-scale NGOs and the public, with no assistance from the French government.Am lie Jacques, a famous French blogger who grew up in Paris and Rome, has lived in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso and now resides in Soweto, South Africa. Following the&nbsp;tense situation with refugees in Calais, in a short essay on her blog&nbsp; Ubuntu she voiced her concerns about the French government&#8217;s harsh policies limiting refugees entrance into the country. She also contrasted how easy it is for her to travel with a French passport with how difficult it is for people from other countries: &#8220;No matter whether they&#8217;re refugees, asylum seekers, economic migrants, if they&#8217;re fleeing war, persecution, or simply looking for a better future &hellip; all migrants should be able to come to France and to elsewhere in Europe. There&#8217;s no moral reasoning not to allow people to come and live in another country.&#8220;What&#8217;s this prejudice and inequality based on? French people are no more worthy of rights than other men and women. More than rights, these are privileges. What&#8217;s more, such privileges are based on where you&#8217;re born because in our world, you&#8217;re either born with the right passport or not. Such inequality of rights is devoid of all morality. We either take a step down on the ladder of privilege and confine each person to the country where they were born, or we allow every human being the right to migrate and move out of their own land.&#8221;France has long been a nation of immigration with debates surrounding assimilation and secular identity, in particular concerning migrants from former colonial nations such the Maghreb region of Algeria, Morocco and North Africa. However, in the light of the recent refugee crisis, France&#8217;s response has been rather poor, unlike its&nbsp;European neighbour Germany.The French government originally committed to welcoming refugees from Syria, but in practice is not a main recipient of refugees from Syria. The UK and France have in fact been locked in a battle of wills in an attempt to pass off responsibility for welcoming refugees. France maintains that these refugees want to reach the UK, whilst the UK government neither wants to fully open its doors.As a whole, Europe remains divided on the issue of resettling refugees from war-torn countries, and some members of the European Union continue to express hostility to the idea. &mdash; Globalvoices.org